---
layout: blog-entry
title: HHKB first impressions
tags: [hhkb, programming]
---
I got myself a Happy Hacking Keyboard as a Christmas present this year. The keyboard has a modified ANSI layout that allows for a more effective typing experience. What drew me to this keyboard was the promise of the end game keyboard, a better layout for programming, the simple yet elegant design, the lack of batteries, and the fact that it was made in Japan.

## End game

One of the reasons for this claim is the Topre switches that are described as providing a unique typing experience and are satisfying to type on. My only long-term experience with any keyboard is with the membrane ones that you get assigned at work and a very clicky Varmilo VA88M that I bought to communicate with my Raspberry Pi via SSH. I always thought the Cherry MX Blue switches were okay but didn't really spark enough joy to draw me back into using them. So I've stuck to membrane keyboards for at least the last four years.

Recently, I switched my career path towards full stack development and I thought it was time for a better keyboard. I bought the HHKB Professional Classic hoping to get something of quality that would allow me to keep programming and writing on this blog, and to stop thinking about the next keyboard I want to get. So far, the feeling is nice, the size is perfect, and I'm getting used to the new keymaps.

## Arrow keys

I thought about getting this keyboard for the longest time but I wasn't quite convinced. And for most people thinking about getting this keyboard, it's the same: I'm so used to the arrow cluster, how difficult is it going to be to make the change? So I started paying attention to my use of the arrow keys, and I realized that I use them mostly to move around when reviewing code.

While doing my research I realize the layout of my next keyboard was more important than I thought. The swedish layout is cluttered with keys that I don't use, and the important symbols used in programming are located in inconvenient locations. HHKB offers a layout that is more efficient for programming, and it's a 60% keyboard. This means that the arrow keys are accessed through a function layer. As a Vim user I'm used to navigate around using the hjkl keys. This led me to search for a way to remap those keys. [Karabiner-Elements](https://github.com/pqrs-org/Karabiner-Elements) is an open source utility that allow just that.

## Locking the screen

And while remapping the arrow keys, I also remapped how I lock the screen. One of the few things I think Windows does better than macOS is the simple task of locking the screen with Win+L. So I remapped Control+Command+Q to Option+L.

## Swedish letters

And while the idea of simplicity sounds good, a small keyboard means less keys at your disposal. In the US ANSI layout, the  letter å is easily accessible with Option+A. On the other hand, the other two are a variation of the letter U: Letter ä is Option+U and then A (and all that plus Shift for Ä). Letter ö is the same but we press O instead. So four key presses for Ä or Ö is a bit too much.

Luckily, Karabiner-Elements allows for complex re-mappings. I remapped ä and ö to Option+A and Option+O respectively. This way I can type the swedish letters with just two key presses.

## Karabiner JSON file

[Here](https://gist.github.com/s-estay/3eeb1e6e1ee8ff71b029acc32ad05b1b) you can see the JSON file that I used to remap the keys. I'm still getting used to the new layout, but so far I'm happy with the purchase. I'll keep you updated on how it goes.
