---
layout: blog-entry
title: Intermezzo by Sally Rooney (2022)
tags: [books]
---

This one was part of my 2026 to-read list. I started *Intermezzo* last April, but only finished it this month as other books kept jumping the queue. The curse of being too curious.

Early on, just 60 pages in, I noticed how distinct and compelling Sally Rooney’s writing is, one of the most impressive I’ve encountered this year. It didn’t click immediately though. Her blending of inner dialogue, world description, and conversation, all in the same paragraph, creates a dynamic sense of unpredictability. Yet it flows naturally, mirroring the way I experience the clash between inner and outer worlds.

The story follows two brothers grieving their father’s loss. Peter, the older brother, is a successful Dublin lawyer, articulated, intelligent, sophisticated. Still in love with his ex-girlfriend, Sylvia, he struggles after she ends their relationship following an accident. Sylvia, hiding her true feelings, pushes Peter away, urging him to find someone else. Heartbroken and confused, he becomes entangled with Naomi, a much younger woman with a sharp, ironic worldview. In Sylvia, Peter finds his intellectual equal, someone with whom he can share elevated discussions about art, politics, and law, even wise words when life feels incomprehensible. As Peter reflects, *“To be in the presence of her intellect: lifted into finer air.”* But not love. In Naomi, he finds self-destruction, fleeting pleasure, and a reckless relationship on the brink of collapse.

Ivan, the younger brother, is an introverted chess player living in Peter’s shadow. Kind-hearted, his worldview is no less interesting, filled with emotion and self doubt. He keeps his distance from Peter, whom he feels talks down to him, always criticising. Ivan meets an older woman, **Margaret**, who has spent her life conforming everyone else’s expectations but her own. They fall in love and begin dating in secret, the age gap troubling her far more than it does him. *“Between himself and Margaret in that moment he felt a closeness that could never be joined by anyone else. Looking at her he wanted to say: I love you. Instead he swallowed and said nothing, not because it wasn’t true, but because he knew it would make things more complicated.”* Rooney captures the tension between longing and restraint, the push and pull of human connection.

Throughout most of the book, Peter and Ivan’s storylines unfold independently, only crossing when Ivan tells Peter about Margaret. Peter, perhaps projecting his own issues with Naomi, dismisses her as an older woman taking advantage of a younger man, seeing Ivan through the lens of his own shortcomings. In the end, it is through forgiveness that the brothers finally meet each other, as two men bound by loss. As Rooney writes, *“Ivan and his brother have both lost the same father: surely the loss is something that should be shared, expressed, consoled, not kept separate and silent.”* And: *“Sometimes you need people to be perfect and they can’t be and you hate them forever for not being even though it isn’t their fault and it’s not yours either.”*

Best book I’ve read this year: the writing style, the weight of every thread. Five sweet whippets out of five.